>> Richard Feldman: Some terminology
we're going to use in this course.
So as previously mentioned,
there's assembler,
which is basically low-level to low-level.
So in this case, when I say low-level,
I mean not intended to be human readable.
Transpiler is high level to high level,
that is something that's intended to be
human readable, and
that's what you get out the other side.
Interpreter is generating, whatever
that output target is at runtime, and
a compiler is taking it and
generating the output at compile time,
as opposed to when the program's running.
Okay, in addition to spitting out output,
another thing that modern compilers do is
analysis, so this can include
things like name checking.
So this would be like, I defined
a variable and then I used it, good job.
I used the variable and
I never defined it, that's a naming error,
that analysis can be done at compile time.
This doesn't necessarily have anything
to do with the output of the program.
As we're gonna see, you can just
cut that step out if you want.
But a lot of compilers actually rely on
the assumption that the naming analysis
has been done.
And so, later stages of compilation
are kind of assuming that.
If there ever was any problem with the
names, that they would have been sorted
out by now or you would have gotten
an error and not made it to this far.
Because if you can't have that assumption,
it does make the later stages of the
compiler more complicated to implement.
So it's pretty common to see compilers
that, if you have a naming error,
you just won't see any type errors.
And the reason for that is that, the
compiler compiler was designed to be like,
yeah, if there's any naming errors, let's
just stop and make them fix that first.
Because otherwise, we would have to deal
with the possibility of the names being
wrong later in type checking and later,
and we don't wanna deal with that, so
we just stop.
You don't have to do it that way,
in the rock compiler,
which is the language I've been
building for several years now.
We do the hard thing [LAUGH] actually
allow you to have naming errors and
typing errors coexisting.
Another is type checking,
type inference, both of those
are flavors of type analysis.
You can get very, very fancy with this and
very, very simple with this.
This, course,
is gonna be more on the simple side,
[LAUGH] cuz we have limited time.
But rest assured, there's a very,
deep rabbit hole,
how far you can go with
a fanciness of type checking.
And then finally, optimization
is very common analysis paths,
this can work in one of two ways.
One way is where the optimizer,
well, the analysis runs and
figures out some ways that your
code could run better, and
then it tells you what those things are,
that would be like pure analysis.
So this is usually more like linters.
So an example of this is in Rust,
there's a linter called Clippy.
Named after the famous, like Microsoft
Office, [LAUGH] Clippy animated icon.
And one of the things that I'll tell you
about is like, hey, you're doing a clone,
like a deep clone of this thing,
and you don't need to be.
Definitely if you just took that clone
out, your code would still work and
it would run faster, so
maybe you wanna take that out.
But the much more common version of
this is, it's doing the analysis, and
then immediately applying
the analysis to your code.
And just changing what code it
actually spits out the other side,
based on heuristics and things that
it's going to expect are going to make
your code sort of run equivalently,
hopefully.
Unless there's a bug or something like
that, and such that the optimization is
essentially harmless, but
it makes your code run faster.
So the former kind like the Clippy style
is more about, you as the programmer,
have more control, but it's also less
convenient and way less powerful,
much more common is
the automated optimization.
We're not gonna do any
optimization in this course,
you could easily do a whole
course on just on optimization.
So for our purposes, we're just
gonna focus on name resolution and
type checking.
Okay, so quick overview of the course.
So basically, what we're going to be
building over the course of this course
is, a compiler for a small subset of JS,
a very small subset of JS.
We're talking like you get strings,
and numbers, and Booleans, and
arrays of those and functions, and
ternaries, and that's it [LAUGH].
We gave you plus and times for operators.
So, that's such a big deal,
and cons, okay?
Cons to, so, yeah,
very small subset of JS.
And on top of that, it's actually
an even smaller subset than that,
because if we were building a production
compiler for the subset I just described,
it would be several times as
long as what we are building.
Because we are omitting all sorts
of edge cases and ergonomics,
things that the programmer would want and
so forth.
Because again,
the point of this is learning, so
we're not trying to build
a production grade compiler here.
Obviously, no one wants
that subset of JS anyway.
The whole point of this is just to
understand, what does it actually look
like when you are building this part
of a type checker, this part of naming
resolution, or this part of a code
generator at the end of the pipeline?
We're gonna build a real compiler,
it's just not going to be
an awesome compiler [LAUGH].
So we're actually gonna
start with formatting, and
you might think formatting that's
prettier not a compiler at all.
We'll see if it's the same thing by
the end of the course, source code in,
source code out, is it a transpiler?
Is prettier a transpiler?
We'll see.
So, we're gonna start with a name
resolution after formatting.
So the first section is gonna be,
we're gonna build a very quick formatter.
The main purpose of this is, I'm kind of
intentionally hand waving away the first
two steps of compilation, which are, well,
parsing, you can just start with parsing.
You don't need to have a separate lexing
or tokenizing step before that, but
it's very common.
The reason I'm skipping through that is
that, Frontendmasters already has a course
on interpreters,
which goes into depth on that.
So if you're curious about those stages of
compilation, you can just totally go watch
that course, and then learn about
how lexicon and parsing works.
So my goal for this course is to kind of
speed run through that very quickly and
just kind of give a very hand
wavy overview of how those work.
And then move on to the stuff that we
don't have any material for, which is
these other things, formatting, name
resolution and, of course, type inference.
Yeah, so we're not building TypeScript
here, [LAUGH] to no one's surprise.
And we're going to be using
Hindley-Miller type inference.
We'll talk a little bit more about that
when we get to the type inference section.
But it's a very famous type inference
algorithm used by languages like Haskell
and Elm and rock the language I'm making.
And, yeah,
it's got a lot of nice properties,
which we will talk more about
when we get to that section.
And then finally, the last step that we're
going to do is WebAssembly generation,
where we're actually going to take all
of this stuff that we've used up at this
point as inputs and then actually output
some WebAssembly and get to see it run.
I will note, though that these are not
evenly spaced, so formatting and
name resolution are pretty quick early on.
Most of what we're going to do today is
the type inference part that's broken down
into multiple sections,
and then at the very end,
we're just gonna have one section
on the WebAssembly generation.
So, most of what we'll be doing today is
type checking and type inference related.